formerly either manager or assistant city
manager in Long Beach before he went to Phoenix. So
he was not a homegrown product. You know what
happened to the city planner in Long Beach? No. He
ended up in jail. Oh, is that right? Yes, for fraud.
And Bob Paternoster came out from Pittsburgh to
take over and give planning a good name again in
Long Beach. That was a real scandal in the Southern
California planning circle.
We're getting a far field from Texas. Moved to Fort
Worth in the summer of 1964.
Was planning director under Jerry Brownlee, a
Cookingham protege. And unfortunately, about a
year and nine months After I got on the scene, Jerry
Brownlee decided to look to greener pastures in
private business. And he went with the Justin
family
as a private venture operation. But he was also
involved with various interests in cattle
wholesale, grocery, and so on in a management
role. So he did very well for himself. And I think
it's his son. Jerry Brownlee was very positive
about planning, as of course LP Cookingham has
been over the years.
We were instrumental finally in Fort Worth in
getting the concept of sector planning
established. this as a device for the development
of our own comprehensive plan. The sector
planning process literally said for each of some
eight or nine major sectors in the city, the
planning studies, in-depth planning studies
would be done. Then through a process of involving
a sector planning council composed of citizens
from the community, from that community,
property owners primarily, but residents in
general. We would then thrash out various aspects
of the plan. We had a general framework plan for the
community in terms of housing, circulation,
commercial industrial generators, and
recreation facilities. Those were the four main.
elements that we used to guide. How had that been
developed, that plan? Well, that was primarily
statements of principle rather than physical
delineation. And all that we said was, here are the
observable patterns. These are in place today.
Now, if we're going to work in a given sector, and
these are certain principles that need to be
observed, and which were commonly accepted about
density and things of that sort. The Gruen Plan had
already been developed. Gruen Plan had already
been and gone in Fort Worth. But had left an impact.
Had left an impact, but as people around Fort Worth
were quick to point out, the Gruen Plan, or Gruen,
left more grandchildren than was a child that was
living. The Bruin Plan from Fort Worth never came
to fruition. But that, in turn, spawned lots and
lots of communities that adapted the concepts to
their own local situation. In that sense, it was a
very influential project. Yes, just not so
influential for Fort Worth. The reason for that,
and I arrived on the scene a couple of years after
the major impact of the Gruen Plan. The reason for
that was that the Gruen Plan was subsidized by
private interest and the public agencies were
told, keep your nose out of it. We don't want to hear
from the public agencies. We don't want to know
anything from the public community about what
ought to be in this. We are doing this for the
business community. And when it was all done, it
was handed to the council and said, here's your
plan for the CBD. It was basically funded by the
power company, wasn't it? Correct. Texas
Electric Service Company and a couple of the banks
were the prime movers in that. I was in Victor's
office in Beverly Hills about the time you went to
Fort Worth, It worked for Victor for about a year.
The plan could have been accomplished had the
business interests said, we want more than just
factual information about the community. We want
to involve him. But those were not his marching
orders, or that was not the way he conceived his
work to be. And of course, Victor Grun's a very
strong personality. And that project was
reported at $50,000 for that CBD study. Cheap.
Yeah, even at that time, that was a fairly cheap
kind of thing. What was lacking, though, was a
sense of commitment on the part of the downtown
interest to support it when it came to such things
as bridges and parking garages and the
underground system and all of that. Servicing.
That's where it fell. Well, Victor brought to that
job a lot of previous experience in shopping
center design. And he treated the CBD as a gigantic
shopping center. That's right. And as you say, it
probably would have worked if he had had the
cooperation of everybody. Well, part of that may
have also been a little bit of a reaction by
property owner interests in downtown who did not
feel themselves completely as if they were being
treated equitably by the big businesses, namely
the power company and the banks. And at that time,
you have to keep in mind there were a lot of very,
very small property owners in downtown Fort
Worth. I mean, there were places that had only 30
foot of building. So to that extent, I don't know
that Gruen really dealt with the dynamics of a
situation, perhaps never even tried to put
together in his own mind or his staff the model of
the dynamics that would be necessary in order to
get these property owners all committed to
something. He felt, I'm sure, that he had the major
ones, and that was sufficient. But there were too
many little ones in there that just simply
thwarted things. And not deliberately, it was
just they felt they were being sort of thrown to the
wolves. Yes, and then, you know, having worked in
his shop in Beverly Hills, it's clear to me that
anyone involved on that project. I wasn't
involved on that. That was before I came into the
office. But clearly, the tradition in the office
was to approach these things as a physical design
project. And anything related to economics and
the social aspects of it were handled by the front
office, if they were handled at all. Oh, I see.
Well, they weren't handled in Fort Worth. I mean,
that was just... I think
it was typical of planning in general at the time.
Yeah, an awful lot of it. And in fact, in that
respect, Hal Wise was really unique
in his way of doing things. That's one reason I have
a lot of appreciation for what Hal did in Austin,
because even to this day, I have bumped into people
in Austin who still talk about Hal Wise's work.
Whether they liked it or didn't like it, he is
identified as having listened to people. Harry
Halliton was maybe a little too brusque with
people. But that was Harry's nature. And they had a
little trouble understanding this fellow from
Northern California that seemed to not quite
appreciate the parochialism of the Austin
community. Hal could tune into that very quickly.
Oh, yeah. Well, he wore his cowboy boots. Well,
sure. But he also listened to people. And people
knew that he was listening. Harry listened, but
they didn't know he was listening. And they might
arrive at the same judgment when it was all said and
done, except the public didn't know that Harry was
listening. And that makes a lot of difference. The
things that happened in Fort Worth as a result of
the sector planning program was that Howard
McMahon had become city manager. He expected the
sector planning program to be wrapped up in a
matter of two and a half to three years. We had said
to him in our several budget proposals, if you want
this plan, to be more than a document to be sitting
on your shelf. You've got to involve the people. If
the people are going to be involved, then they have
to feel ownership. They are not going to feel
ownership overnight. And he said, well, go tell
them what they need to know. And I said, Howard, it
doesn't work that way. He said, but you have the
backing of my office. Go tell them. I said, but
Howard, they have to wrestle with the hard issues.
And they're going to come back with questions for
you. And you may find some of the questions are
causing you some discomfort. And he said, well, go
tell them what the plan should be. And
philosophically, I found myself increasingly at
odds with that philosophy of city government city
management, the style. Top-down thing. Yep,
strictly top-down. It just didn't gee with my way
of doing things. And some of that's because of Andy
Force inculcating in me the sense of appreciation
of listening to the public and getting them to not
only speak their minds, but also to come up with
ideas and suggestions And as Andy used to say, and
he came out of a background of working in New
Jersey, some of the small communities in New
Jersey, and he worked under Segoe for some period
of time, and then moved, in fact, to Tucson to work
under Segoe, originally when Segoe did the
planning studies in Tucson. But he said, you've
got to listen to the people and you've got to put
their ideas into the plan. He said, if you don't,
They don't buy. It's not theirs. And this is what
Hal would do. It was what the city manager, Howard
McMahon, said, well, take care of that. Just put
those in. I said, don't do that just at the flipping
of a switch. It takes time to resolve these
conflicting issues and points of view and ideas.
So finally, it just got to the point where we were in
a real impasse. And Howard and I had a real set to.
And I said, Howard, you're the city manager. You
run it the way you want to. But I tell you right now,
development of a sector plan, of sector plans and a
program for the city of Fort Worth is probably
going to take, realistically, within the
manpower allocations that you have permitted us
to have set up, probably going to take six to seven
years. And he said, it's got to be done in half that
time at the outside. And I said, well, I'm telling
you. Here's my resignation. And I went into
private practice at that point. And that was in
1969. Interestingly enough, it was within about
two months of the seven years that the last of the
sector plan studies had been processed, gone
through the community, and were adopted by the
City Planning Commission from the date we
started. So I felt very satisfied that my time
estimates were right. And this was in spite of the
fact that Howard then pumped about another
$50,000 to $80,000 a year, successively each
year, that much more, into the Long Range Planning
Program in Fort Worth. But it still took that. kind
of time, not because of the lack of technical
support. It was the time required for citizens to
digest material and make up their minds and ask
questions and resolve issues and come back and
say, this is what we want. For any plan of this
nature, it's about a year gestation time. Sure.
And see, what we were doing was starting a new, we
programmed it to start a new sector study every
four to six months.
And my successor, David Farrington, who was
really an engineer who didn't understand a lot of
things about the planning process, and then he
kind of left him because he saw greener pastures
elsewhere. Then George Human, who was assistant
city manager, took over. And George was the one who
was kind enough to send me a copy of the newspaper
notice that said that the sector planning program
has now come full circle. George is a nice guy. Oh,
yeah, he is. He really is. He had more
understanding of the nature of the planning
process than... Farrington. Farrington.
Farrington. All he saw was the engineering
considerations. Do you know when George took over
as planning director in Fort Worth? Wasn't that
about 19... 71 or so? It would have been close to
that, yes. Late 70 or early 71. And then after
George?
I don't know who was in there then after that. My
predecessor was William Jennings Bryan Baker and
he had been there for five years and Bryan was not a
He was a good talker, but I think he often found
himself crosswise with the city council and other
officials. But he lasted exactly five years to the
day.
By way of a flashback,
reflecting on the Tucson situation, Andy Ford had
come there under Laszlo Seiko. having previously
worked under Segoe in New Jersey on some town
planning assignments, and particularly in
Montclair, New Jersey. And then really what I saw
in Segoe's work in Tucson, which was for Tucson and
Pima County, was a product that was imbued with a
lot of caring about the community. at the same time
with some very strong, strong recommendations
about such things as thoroughfare, street
standards, standards for protection of
floodplain areas and things of that sort. In fact,
Segal was in some respect way ahead of his day
talking about flood hazards out in the desert.
People just didn't believe him. They wouldn't
listen to him at that time. And Andy... for was very
much of a person who would bring up a topic that
Segoe had identified. And he would say, no, wait a
minute. Let's look at this. He'd say this in the
middle of a planning commission meeting. And a
very illustrative example of something occurred
one time in Tucson, a subdivider was had been told
in the review of the subdivision plan, or the
preliminary plan, you must provide your half of
this 150-foot right-of-way or 160-foot
right-of-way along this major street. And I don't
remember what road it was. It's not important. Do
you want all this? Yeah. The point is that the man
protested to the city council and said the city has
never adopted that comprehensive plan. The city
has never adopted the third streets and highways
plan.
The issue, the council, of course, was on
tenterhooks. What do we do? They turned it over to
the city attorney, and the city attorney came
right back and said, you don't have to have adopted
that. Your planning commission has been
observing it. You have been ratifying it with
every subdivision plat that you've approved in
accordance with state law. You have insisted that
every developer along the way adhere to the
standards that are enunciated in that plan, and
that plan has been well known in the community for
six, seven, eight years. You are on perfectly
solid ground. The man took the issue to court, and
the court sustained the position of the city
attorney. They said, in fact, the city council had
adopted the plan because over and over, in their
actions, they had referred to the plan as their
official guide. Sort of like a common law
marriage. That's right, very much so. And I think I
gained a lot of respect for Andy Ford at that point
because he saw this as a bond, if you will, between
reflected in community policy between the
official actions on the one hand and the advisory
actions on the other. And one other thing that Andy
did do, which I appreciated very much, He taught me
very well how to do minutes of meetings. And he had a
little trick that he used that came out of his
experience in New England town meetings when he
lived up in New England. Because the New England
town meeting sometimes gets to be kind of
disjointed. He said there were three actions that
you could report, either how something was voted,
how it was agreed upon, or what the consensus was.
And he said, those are the three key words that you
put in your minutes. And he said, once the minutes
are ratified by the body at the next meeting or
whenever, that's just as good as any binding
formal vote. And I have lived by that over the years
since. And when I went to Austin, we developed the
minutes so that it was reflected such and such was
voted to recommend or to approve or whatever and if
it was simply an agreement it was agreed colon that
so and so or if it was a situation where there wasn't
any apparent agreement it appeared to be the
consensus colon that so and so would be done and
that resolved the matter and uh i talked with city
attorneys various times uh when i show them this
and boy they were just tickled to death they said
these have been adopted i said yes I said, okay,
that's all we need to know. So Andy Ford, because of
experience under CEDAW, really carried down a lot
of things for me.
I was involved in a couple of things while I was in
Fort Worth. One was a very active role in setting up
the North Central Texas Council of Governments as
a staff person. There were several of us from
Dallas and Fort Worth and some of the other cities
that took an active role in that. And I was really
the one responsible to the city manager for the
city of Fort Worth's part in the background work
leading up to COG being established.
I was also involved uniquely because of the
research interests that I had in the effort to get
the School of Social Work established at UT
Arlington. And I was also involved in
establishing, in a way, the planning program at
the School of Architecture at UT
Arlington. Particularly in heading the
committee that Bob Wagner referred to, trying to
come up with some basic criteria for
incorporation into the curriculum. That was with
Bill Shevlin. That's right. Bill was on that, and
frankly, I don't remember who all the other people
were. There were quite a few of us that were
involved. Bob was involved. Bob Wagner was
involved in that. Shevlin was involved. I was.
Springer provided some background in that.
I don't remember who the others were, but there
were half a dozen people that were involved in one
fashion or other. And it was finally up to me to
develop the final recommendations as they went
into UT. So I felt, in a lot of ways, my
contributions sort of hit a number of areas. The
social work area and research area, I'd been
involved at TCU in the urban studies program.
teaching there in the planning courses, and then
at SMU teaching in the planning courses through
real estate and regional science. How do you view
the current state of planning in Texas today?
Frankly, I'm not as happy with the situation or as
comfortable with it as I would like to be.
On the one hand, Bob, I see the planning not being
allowed to really move out and deal with issues as
they need to be dealt with. I see some of these
neighborhood problems here in Dallas, for
example, where, of course, Dallas has a history of
let the developer control the situation. I don't
read in the newspaper the identification of the
planning function as being intimately involved
with the concerns of what happens in the
neighborhood. That's not a fair assessment
because I know they are, or at least I think they
are. But on the other hand, I don't find that the
newspapers are identifying the planning
function as one that is in the middle of trying to
help deal with the critical issues. It's the
neighborhood group versus the developer instead
of where's the planner in all of this, other than
the private planner for the developer. It sounds
like we don't have much PR. That's one of the
problems, certainly. The other, though, I guess
I'm still suspicious. I say suspicious. That may
not be the best word. But I still have some negative
feelings about the way planning functions in a
council manager city. Not that it's remote from
the manager, but that the manager is pressed so
hard, as is all corporate business in America, to
worry about this next quarter's bottom line
report or next mid-year report or next year's
report on bottom line that the manager and his
staff or her staff are constantly driven by the
dollar signs on the budget and not driven by issues
that are concerned with the dollar signs five
years and ten years from now. A case of
incompatible time horizons. Oh, very much so.
Very much so. The planner, by nature, is not
looking at this quarterly report. I mean, even a
subdivision approval is not looking at that
quarterly report. Oh, no, it's very long range. A
zoning change is not looking at the quarterly
report. At best, it's looking at six months or...
nine months or a year from now. So I think this is the
one shortcoming. The other is that managers
themselves, as I see it, have not been schooled in
the philosophy of long-range planning for their
communities. And they seem to be reflecting
instead at least on the operational side, the
attitudes of the Harvard Graduate School of
Business. We are a large corporate structure. Run
it like a business. Run it like a business, yeah.
And don't bother the people at top with the
problems of the people in the community at large.
After all, they're the taxpayers, but our job is to
do the best professional job we can to run the city
not provide the best community for them. Do you
think the role of state government in Texas with
regard to planning has been adequate? No, quite
frankly. The brightest star on the horizon is the
formation, or was the formation, and still
remains, the councils of government.
I don't... However, the quality of that varies
across the state. Within our own area... You've
done quite well. North Central Texas' cog, which
was the first one in the state, has really done a
beautiful job. I cannot fault conceptually what
they have been able to do. I'm not sure that I agree
with Bill Pitstick, whom incidentally I shared
classes with at UT Austin one time. But I... Bill's
style is again somewhat related to the council
manager's style in the way he runs things. But
because COGs are what they are structurally in
terms of governmental relationships, the
governmental respondents or participants, a
mayor, a councilman, a regional representative,
they are really responsible to for the whole
entity and they're responsible in a sense to each
other as well as their own personal constituency.
That puts the COGS in a different working
relationship than does a city council under a
council manager plan. But what about the state
government itself rather than COGS?
What about the role of the state legislature
vis-a-vis planning legislation, for example?
I don't see much positive support. And I may be very
negative about this. I don't see much positive
support coming out of the legislature for
planning. I think as a state, we are still, well,
we're not quite in the wild west, but we're not from
that strong individualism. Don't bother the man.
or the woman who's trying to do something to pull
himself or herself up our own bootstraps. Don't
bug anybody.
Let me ask you next what your views are on planning
education in Texas. Bob, I guess there's several
things that ought to be said. One is I did. do part of
my graduate work in the planning program.